---
title: The Dreaded kwh
layout: article_post
section: article
excerpt: Many have trouble with the difference between kilowatt and kilowatt hour. Lets quickly clear it up. 
tags:
- requiresCompilation
---



# The Dreaded kwh

----

# Introduction

There seems to be a lot of confusion regarding kilowatt hours despite it being the unit in which residential electricity is sold. Often times it is mixed up with kilowatts. Kilowatt hours and Kilowatts represent different things. I think it is worth clarifying what a kilowatt hour. 

This is a simple mathematical analysis that reduces the terms to simpler units. Understanding how to work with units and their  conversions is incredibly simple and useful. I'm a stickler for writing out units when doing any type math as it will prevent many mistakes. In the future I may write a separate article on units and their conversions intended for non-engineers. For now just understand that kw and kwh are different units which means they cannot be added or subtracted.  

----

# Background

Utility companies generally charge by the kilowatt hour. Sometimes, depending on the rate scheme, they may charge for kilowatt as well. Its worth asking what is a kilowatt hour.  It is simply the amount of **energy** used or generated by one kilowatt in an hour. If an AC has a usage of 1 kilowatt, in one hour it would use 1 kilowatt hour or in *n* hours it would use *n* kilowatts . 

----

#  Theory

If the term is reduced into more simple units it is : 

$$
kilowatt\  hour = kwh =  1000 \ w \ h = 1000 \ \frac{J}{s} \  h
$$

where

  *k*  = kilo = 1000

  *w* = watt

  *h* = hour

  *J* = Joule

  *s* = second

Utilizing the fact that a watt is defined as a Joule / second. Expression (1) shows that a kwh is equivalent to 1000 Joules per second times an hour; this is not intuitive yet.  The second and hour are both units of time so lets get rid of them. 


$$
kwh = 1000 \ \frac{J}{s} \ h = 1000 \ \frac{J}{s} \ 3600 \ s
$$


The  *h* (hour) was swapped out for 3600 *s* , since one hour is 3600 seconds . The *s* is in the numerator and the denominator so it cancels out. The 1000 and the 3600 can be multiplied and the *s*  can be cancelled which yields: 


$$
kwh = 3600000 \ J
$$


It is apparent that *kwh* is just three million and six hundred thousand Joules. What are Joules?  Joules and thus kwh are both measures of **energy**. Utility companies usually just charge for energy . 

What is a kw? Going through similar math:


$$
kw = 1000 \ w = 1000 \frac{J}{s}
$$


A *kw* is just a thousand Joules per second which is energy per time. Energy divided by times is **power**. *kw* is a unit of power. 


$$
Power = \frac{Energy}{time}
$$


Power is a measure of how much energy is used in a specified time.  The expression for power can be rearranged to get 


$$
Energy= Power * time
$$


Which makes it explicit where *kwh* comes from. kilowatt hour (*Energy*) = kilowatt (*power*) * hour (*time*). 

____

# Conclusion

Perhaps it is clear why *kwh* is such a non-intuitive unit. It is a measure of energy using a power term (kw) multiplied by a time term (h). This is a backward way to look at energy in my opinion. The usage of  kwh is convenient because it is compatible with kw and makes certain calculations easy.  

Consider that Colorado currently has an overall capacity of 1,150MW from hydropower[^1]. MW is a megawatt or $10^9$ watts. This is a measure of power not energy.   Hopefully by know you understand the difference between kwh and kw. Now figure out how many kwh Colorado gets from hydropower **per year**.

----

## Man Hours

Since we are on the subject of odd units, lets consider *man hours*. Here is a formula similar to the one above for Energy: 


$$
Work = Rate * time
$$


 There is an interesting parallel between this formula and formula (6) for energy. If there is 1 man working, in *n* hours he will work *n* man hours.  If there are *m* men working, they will work *n* * *m* man hours. 

[^1]: https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/energyoffice/hydropower